Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Reka Blazek. She is a phd candidate
at Jesus lab that is the adaptive Cognition and
Economics and Society lab of the Department of Cognitive
Science at Central European University. She is interested in
the cognitive and evolutionary roots of economic and political
institutions. In other words, what are the links between
the design of the mind and the design of
institutions? And today we're talking basically about how social
minds generate social phenomena, social norms, ownership and also
a little bit about a mental health uh for
phd students. So RCA, welcome to the show. It's
a big pleasure to everyone.
Yeah. Thank you for having me.
OK. So when it comes to the topic of
how social minds might generate societal phenomena, I mean,
what exactly are you interested in understanding here and
particularly linking to things like uh the roots of
economic and political institutions?
Yeah. So this is a huge topic and this
um I, I could talk a lot, a lot
about this and in, in fact, in our, in
our lab at uh it it, it is our
uh pri primary goal is to, is to find
the links between the, the design of the mind
and uh and several um phenomena that, that, that
we see in, in our societies. So, for instance,
um some, some of the topics that we, that
we deal with include uh ownership, which is, which
is my my topic, but we also have uh
responsibility, fairness, uh leader of F fo follower games,
mi mi misinformation, uh commitment and trust. And uh
so these are very di diverse uh diverse topics.
And what is in uh what is in common
is that um we all all approach these topics
uh from their uh co co uh cognitive and
um evolutionary point point points of view. So, in
other words, we, we try to answer the, the
question is that why uh did these things uh
evolve in the, in, in, in, in the first
place? So what sort of um problems in, in,
in society do they try to, to, to solve?
And um the main reason why, why we, why
we would even have, have this approach is that
uh as we all know from, from many different
uh fields of study, uh hu hu humans are
an ultra social uh uh species. So we are
much more social than any other uh gray tapes.
And um the, the main uh evidence for this
is that we uh humans care about the uh
the, the mental states of, of uh Ooo other
humans. So we want to affect how the other
person thinks and, and what the other person uh
uh believes, whereas gray tapes by, by and large,
they only care about the behavior of the other
gray tape. And um so this, this is one
of the um starting points and um a further
starting point um be before we go down to
the, to the specifics. Um IS that we, we
have these incredible um um social cognitive uh capacities.
And um so basically, we, we, we, we want
to see how these um social cognitive capacities translate
into things like like laws and um social norms.
Mhm
A
and so just before we get more specifically into
some of the work you're specifically doing on ownership,
for example. So how does all of that, how
do do all of those starting points then connect
to the study and understanding of how economic and
political institutions develop ba based on the fact that
we have these, as you said, ultra social minds.
Uh HOW do, how do we build from one
to the other, let's say?
Yeah. Um So in uh economics, which is my
uh original academic background, uh there is a, a
very influential uh definition of um institutions by uh
Douglas North, which is that um ins institutions are
the humanly devised, formal and informal constraints. Uh THAT,
that shape uh how we interact in the, in
the economic sphere. Within uh within our societies and,
and groups and uh in the uh political arena.
And um so I was very inspired by, by,
by this quote when I, uh when I first
came across it in my uh political economy uh
courses and uh and, and, and there is a
great uh in, in interest in this, within the
um ee economist um community. But uh one thing
that left me a bit um unsatisfied is that
uh economists tend to treat these um institutions as
uh exogenous to the uh uh to the, to
the model. Uh But I thought that I'm not
sure if, if, if that's right because on the,
on the other hand, uh we have uh Pascal
boys book uh Minds Make Societies. And uh and
I wanted, uh and, and I want, wanted to
join a lab uh that, that connects the two
and uh and that's what it is, is a,
is um so to be a bit more uh
uh a bit more specific, um we have this
uh not uh this norm um not, nor I'm
sorry, um notion from a game theory called uh
common knowledge. It's also um very well studied in,
in psychology. Um One starting point in, in this
uh field in this uh so field is uh
Xing's work on uh on uh uh conflict and
um in, in, in, in my own work, I
try to see how um people I identify what,
what is in the, in the common ground with
uh with other people that allow them to uh
coordinate with each other. So, uh this is a
bit abstract and uh by uh coordinations, I mean
that um so in our social interactions in our
uh in our day to day lives, um one
of our main goals is that we want to
avoid conflict with each other. Uh But, but we
also want to get uh as, as many resources
uh as, as, as it is uh as it
is possible. And um the theory that I'm, I'm,
I'm building to explain uh ownership is that um
is that as we go about our lives, uh
try, trying to uh trying to meet these 22
goals. We, we, we try to read other people's
minds uh which is not an esoteric thing but
uh but the psy psychological uh uh process uh
uh this is what I mean by the, the
social cognitive capacities uh is that in, in the
technical jargon, it's that we, we have a mental
representation of other people's mental representations. And so we
utilize this to, to try to understand what the
other person uh what, what wants to do with
the, with the resources uh around us. And um
when, when, when we come across a resource that
we, we both want to use. Uh But uh
there is no way to, to, to use it
at the same time then uh we have a
few uh options in uh ga game theoretic terms.
It means that we, we, we have a choice
between several uh uh uh pp payoffs. And the
best um uh pay off is when I either
uh take the resource and you, you don't or
you don't take the resource. Uh And uh I
do it. Yeah. So in uh in other words,
we, we have a choice between usage and no
usage or no usage and uh and usage. And
if we both want to try to use it
at the same time, then we have costs of
uh of fighting with each other. And if none
of us uh u uses the resource, then we
miss out on the, on the benefits that may,
that the, the resource may yield us. And um
so to give you a bit more uh con
context about this uh uh for formulation. So this
is called the, the usage game that is used
to, to model uh ownership in uh uh Chea's
book understanding in, in institutions. But this, this sort
of uh uh payoff pay of matrix has also
been called the hog dove game in uh evolutionary
biology, but also the chicken game in uh in
uh uh economics. Um And it, the, the, the
chicken game is about um letting the other, other
person know that you're, you're just about to make
a move or you're not just about to make
ma make a move and then what, what connects,
uh, all, all of these games is that, um,
it's a bit counterintuitive to, to, to, to think
that. So some, sometimes I'm, I would be more,
uh, better off if I don't go for, for,
for, for, for, for the research that I want.
Um, AND yeah, so, uh, I, I don't want
to talk to too much about game theory.
Uh, OK. So let me ask you because you've
just described a little bit or gave us a
broad idea of the kinds of games specifically, I
guess coordinations that you use in behavior economics here
to then, right, to go from there to I
guess modeling social norms, right? So, uh I mean,
you, you do you have those kinds of studies
based on those games? And so uh how do
you, do you go from there to modeling social
norms? Exactly.
Yes. Um I understand the question. I'm trying to
think of the best way to.
No, of course. Thank you.
No worries uh to, to explain it. So when,
when we are faced with this uh with these
payoffs, uh then we have this um uh selection
problem. So we, we, we have to choose between
who, who goes for the resource and, and who,
who, who, who, who, if it draws. And this
is where uh so social norms come in or
in, in my, in my specific work. Uh This
is where beliefs about uh on ownership uh coming
coming coming to the model um in um in
um in the theoretical framework that uh Francesco coa
uses in, in, in his book, uh he has
this notion um correlation device and uh the uh
correlation device is any sort of um norm or
anything that, that sends a, a signal to the,
to the 22 parties about uh how, how, how,
how, how they should behave. Uh So to make,
make it uh a bit less uh AAA abstract,
we have uh the traffic lights. So when, and
uh traffic lights send um a clear signal about
who should go, go, go ahead and uh and
who, who should wait. And um the fact that
it's that it's a red light and the, and
the, and the green light makes it very easy
to be instantly recognized. Uh WHO should do what.
And um, and we also know that everybody around
us who, who takes part uh in uh in
traffic also knows what these, uh what these lights
mean. And we, we follow what the, what the
lights uh tell, tells us to do, knowing that
everybody else uh around us uh does this and
it's not because we have all signed some, some,
some sort of form that I, I uh promise
to not run into you. And uh but it's
um it's this um uh sort of in invisible
but not quite uh invisible uh on, on unwritten
rules uh that, that govern our lives. And, uh,
and this is where, uh, common knowledge comes in.
So, uh, common knowledge is, is defined as the
thing that I know you, you, you know, and
we both know that, that, that, that we both
know and the fact that we both know that
uh, red means stop changes how we, how, how,
how we behave. And, um, and this is where,
um, the model, OK. Um, TO, to scale up
and start. Mhm
So, uh I mean, perhaps to get into a
more concrete example, you've already told us a little
bit about uh how, then you study ownership and
how you're interested in ownership, but perhaps getting more
specifically into that, let me ask you a few
more specific questions about your work on ownership and
how it applies to our lives basically. So, uh
uh I mean, uh where exactly what are the
domains of our lives where ownership applies? Because perhaps
there are a few more domains where it applies
that perhaps we commonly do not think about it
as having anything to do with ownership. Exactly. So
tell us a little bit about that.
Actually, I would say that ownership applies to every
domain uh in our lives. So we, if you,
if, if you think about it, we, we talk
about lots of different things in terms of ownership.
So of course, we have our uh belongings at
home that um that are, of course uh ours,
but we also use the term uh ownership to,
to talk about i ideas. Uh So uh a,
a tune or some sentences in a, in a
book or in a, in a scientific paper. Um
We also uh talk about the uh public space
that, that surround us in, in terms of ownership.
So, like the uh our park or our uh
street which scales up to uh con concepts like
our nation as opposed to their nation. Um I
would say that our bodies is a, is a
special case of uh of ownership. Mhm And there
are many uh uh many, many questions at the
fringes of ownership that, that are, are highly uh
uh topical right now. So for, for, for instance,
it's not clear who, who owns the uh uh
uh uh output of Chad GP T. Um And
uh it's also not clear who, who will own
um outer space. And does this even make, make
any sense to ask who would own uh outer
space?
A and also at a certain point, you mentioned,
when I asked you about how you model social
norms about how beliefs in this specific case about
ownership really play a role here. But what are
these beliefs about ownership? I mean, are there specific
kinds of beliefs that people have that perhaps are
more or less universal across human societies, for example.
Yes, there are 22 beliefs about ownership that are
uh near universal across uh across cultures the one
that is very well documented is the first possession
assumption. Uh Orie Friedman has done a lot of
work. Uh SH showing that uh this not only
emerges at a very young age, but it also
emerges at roughly the same ages across, across many
cultures. And it means that the, the first person
who was seen with an object owns the object.
Um And actually this, this is the basis of
many uh, laws in us, uh, uh, property loan
based on, um, 1/19 century, uh, uh, court case
called, uh, Pearson versus Post. And they were fighting
about, uh, a fox that they were goes hunting.
Uh, WELL, one of them, uh, saw it first
but the other, uh, shot it first and then,
so the dispute was over who actually gets to
keep the, the, the fox. And the court ruled
that, uh, the person who c first can claim
ownership, uh, over it. The other, uh, that is
somewhat universal, um, is the importance of the last
piece of food. Um This is based on, uh,
anecdotal, um, evidence that I've been, uh, collecting in
recent weeks. Um And, uh, what, what I, what,
what I have found that many, many languages across
the world have a special phrase or saying that,
that suggests that, that, uh, that taking the last
piece of food is, uh, either, uh, shameful or
that the last piece of food is, uh, uh,
special. So only the the special person gets to,
gets to take it. And if I'm not mistaken,
there are actually two phrases in uh in Portuguese,
one about the um the last biscuit in the
uh in the uh package.
Yeah. Yeah. By the way, the phrase in Portuguese
is a whole mob. So
yes. And the other other one is that I,
I feel like the last uh slice of bread
in the loaf uh which I'm told is a,
is a way to express that you feel abandoned
somehow.
Mhm
uh
But uh by the way, you, you mentioned uh
two or three beliefs about ownership that at least
according to the best evidence we have. And according
to what you said are at near universal, but
it's one thing for us to have those beliefs
across human societies. But do we have any idea
of why we have them? I mean, where exactly
they come from because why these beliefs specifically? That's,
I guess the question here.
Yeah. The short answer to that question is that
we have no, no, no idea where, where, where,
where they come from. Um That there hasn't been
uh too much research about, about uh the uh
evolutionary roots of the, of, of these beliefs. Um
WE have and uh a lot of um ethnographic
uh evidence about uh ho ho how much uh
norms vary when it comes to uh giving sh
sharing and, and um uh uh gifting and, and
we also know that, uh, theft is, uh, very
much, um, ff, frowned upon, uh, and it's, it's,
uh, p punished in, in, in severe ways. Um,
BUT where they, where they come from exactly is
not, not explained that. Well, uh, there is some
re re research, um, about it, um, which I,
I would put in, um, uh, on a, on
a spectrum and at the 11 end of the,
one end of the spectrum, these beliefs and, and
norms of that ownership would be explained uh purely
in terms of so social learning and uh and
following rules. So uh this is um th th
th this, this would be the uh purely ga
game theoretic uh ex explanation of beliefs. Um And
the main, main point here is that uh we
just simply acquire these norms uh as we, as
we as, as, as we grow up. Um But
um we don't, we, we are not born with
any specific ideas about uh about ownership or uh
sharing resources. And at the other end of the,
of the spectrum, um we, we have this idea
that uh on ownership is a core uh cog
cognitive uh capacity so that it, it's uh it's
specifically evolved and it's uh it's like uh um
naive uh uh physics or naive uh uh so
sociology, meaning that uh that we are born with,
with some very basic ideas uh about uh in,
in, in interactions between other people or uh that
we, we have this uh uh expectation that um
objects fall, fall down when we let go of
them. That's uh that, that, that is what called
uh naive um uh physics. Uh And this, this
idea is uh uh has been developed by uh
Friedman and uh uh others. And um we also
have a, a newer um uh theory of the
psychology of ownership by uh by Pascal Boyer. And
he explains it as the in interaction of uh
two cognitive um sys systems, which is um cooper
operation and co com competition. And that's where uh
uh beliefs about on ownership are born. And I
would put my own uh developing series somewhere somewhere
in the middle that um that we primarily want
to coordinate with uh with other hu hu human
beings. So we use um anything that we expect
uh the other person to uh to know about
the uh social environment around us. Um So we
use what whatever is in the, in the uh
common ground in order to coordinate with each other
about the use of resources. And that could explain
why, why we have uh such a big uh
diversity in uh in uh own she believes.
Uh And so, I mean, just to summarize it
a little bit before we move on to the
last topic of our conversation today. So there's an
array of theories out there from the ones that
are, that propose perhaps some more innate mechanisms or
some innateness to the idea of, or being attuned
to ownership in some way, all the way to
the ones that are perhaps more developmental based or
more sociologically based where you are really socially exposed
to beliefs about ownership and that's how you acquire
them. But I mean, even I, I would imagine
that, uh first of all, at this point, we're
still not sure which of these theories is correct
or at least more correct than the others. Or
perhaps, or perhaps they might be correct in some
aspects but not others and they then might complement
each other. I don't know. But uh even if
there are some near universality to some of these
ownership beliefs, it uh uh that in and of
itself does not indicate necessarily that uh the beliefs
themselves are somewhat innate, right? Because, I mean, it's
just that we, even if there's some innateness to
our, we're being attuned to pay attention to perhaps
uh social information about ownership or ownership beliefs and
practices, uh that's not the same as those beliefs
being uh innate, right? It's something that we might
just acquire through, I don't know, some game theoretical
phenomena or some other sort of uh social psychological
uh mechanisms uh that we might acquire from other
people in our society and culture. Right.
Yeah. Yeah. II, I think that the way you
put it is uh is exactly right. So I,
I don't believe that um the first possession assumption
for instance, is uh in and of itself um
innate. It's the, it's the fact that it's so
intuitive is what, what makes it uh a cultural
um universal. So, uh as you said, the innate
mechanisms that uh we all share um as a
h humans is the, is the ability to, to
be uh ultras social and the, and the ability
and the desire to uh to, to cooper and
coordinate with others. And this um this manifests uh
it. So this is uh manifest from or in,
in uh a white uh range of uh cul
cultural be, be, be behaviors or to put it
in a, in a slightly different way. The uh
uh there are cultural uh evolutionary processes that cater
to the uh cognitive capacities of humans that are
uh scaffolded on, on top of uh bi biological
evolutionary processes. And to uh translate that um I
would say that there is a, that there are
two sets of in intuitions. Uh DIVIDER set is
the, the uh biological set and the uh the
local uh the local culture uh makes it more
uh uh specific to the. So, so that it
fits the, the, the highly specific local uh en
environment. So to give an example, we have um
in, in, in, in inheritance and um usually in
most, most societies, the uh offspring uh gets some
of the wealth or uh land or whatever that
the, that their uh that, that their parents had
because, uh, it's more, more beneficial if, if it
stays within the, uh, within the same, uh, kinship
structure and it's, um, but it's ba based on
the, the specific, um, society uh, uh structure, uh,
that who, who, who gets to in, in inherit
first, the, the first born son or the 1st,
1st born daughter.
Mhm. Ok, great. So, um, I guess that, uh,
now we can move on to the last topic
of our conversation today, which has to do with
mental health in phd students. I mean, you are
a phd student. I myself have never been a
phd student but I have a master's degree. So
it was already a bit stressful back then. So
tell us a little bit more about that. So,
uh I, I mean, o of course, this is
not a strictly academic topic but since you are
a phd student and you are interested in this,
I mean, in the challenges and mental challenges and
anxieties that the phd student usually goes through. What
are your, uh I mean, what would you have
to say about the topic here?
Yeah, I, I think it's important to uh talk
about it and e especially in, in your uh
uh show because I assume most of your audience
are uh in uh academia uh either at the
phd student level or, or at the faculty level.
And um so what, what I the, the mo
most, most important thing that um that I think
every phd student goes through is that when we,
when we start this um journey, we, we have
to make the mental switch from consuming knowledge to,
to producing knowledge. And um that's not easy at
all and all the um series and uh scientific
um uh paradigms that, that we had to master
in our master's degrees. And, and before that they,
we, we, we find out that they are actually
not that much um set in stone. And uh
everything is much more uh mu much more flexible
and much less uh uh predictable than then, than
we thought it would be. And um and this
is, this is where the, the challenge uh uh
stems from because when, as, as we, as, as
we try to find our uh uh specific fields
that we uh that, that we write our diseases
on. We, we have to, we, we have to
find a way to, to make a meaningful contribution
to uh to academia and um uh that's not
easy at all. Um And the, and the other,
other thing that's uh that's uh specific to uh
to the position of phd students is that um
the whole, the whole uh structure uh of most
phd programs around the world uh is uh that
we are basically our, our own boss and that
the uh mo motivation it has to come from
viz because um the, the fruits of our, our
labor. Um, IT'S not that it, it doesn't come
then the next day. In fact, it, it, it,
it takes years to, to, to see some actual
tangible results. And, um, and then, you know, you,
you have to be able to, to, to find
what, uh, what motivates you on the, on the,
on the day to day basis.
A and so, basically, I guess that the main
challenge here is that as you move from your
master's degree to a phd, uh you have basically
to become a theoretician yourself, right? I mean, you
have to try to start to develop your own
hypothesis and not just consume the work of other
people uh and try and try to make work
on that basis. And you also have to try
to be to become more and more aware of
the fact that perhaps if you're trying to study
or understand the particular phenomena in this case, for
example, a psychological phenomenon, um you have to look
across the different hypotheses out there are different theories,
some of them with more or less support and
you have to try to basically weigh them. Uh
And then uh uh also, I, I would imagine
that at the end of the day, you also
have to decide on the theoretical framework that you're
going to apply in your specific work, which is,
I would imagine very complicated. I mean, I, I'm,
I'm uh an interview or a science communicator to
some extent. As I said, I've never been a
phd student, but just because I talk with people
from many areas and disciplines and sometimes we, we
end up covering the same topics but from different
perspectives. And I myself many times find myself thinking
about, ok, so there's this theory, that theory and
then of course, it's not for me to decide
which one is correct. I just ask the questions
and many times if people are honest, they say,
oh, we're still not sure. Uh I have this
and that idea. I don't know. Or I think
that the, this theory has more support to it
than the others. And I'm going to explain why,
but we're still not sure, something like that. And
uh but, but um in most cases, I mean,
I'm interviewing already, professors, tenured professors, people that have
been doing this for sometimes decades and for a
phd student to really get into that mindset and
to really uh by themselves trying to evaluate all
that kind of information I would imagine is very
complicated,
right? Yes. Um It is. Um And it's, it's
important to um understand that um on, on, on
the one hand, all the uh uh theoretical frameworks
that, that we use, they ha they have their
limits and uh and every sort of um empirical
work also has, has their, their, their limits. Um
So, uh so, as I said, in the, in
the first part of this uh interview II, I
use insights from, from, from game theory, but also
from uh anthropology and uh uh and cognitive science.
Uh Because I, because I, I think that every
academic field has, has their uh advantages but also
also their limits and um uh the, the best
way to, to, to find the, the richest um
explanation or the or the, or the best uh
uh mo model is to, is to combining insights
from uh from multiple fields. And that means that
um that it's hard to, it's hard to reconcile
established um frameworks with other established frameworks. And uh
it takes, I would say years of um or,
or, or lots of time to, to, to sharpen
your um argumentative skills and to, and to really
try to understand what uh CRE A uh tr
tries to explain um and what uh Creb tr
tries to do and how, how they can uh
or where they, where they co co co compliment
each other. And yeah, as, as, as you said,
we, um we, we will never know the full
truth about um our fields and about uh anything
to be, to be honest, we can just get
better at better at uh creating tools that help
us understand it.
Yeah. And even when it comes to the sort
of need for interdisciplinary, I mean, getting familiarized with
different fields and different methodologies, different theories that that's
also a very big challenge, right? Because for example,
if someone in your particular case, is tried to
bring, to bring to the table tools from psychology,
economics, anthropology, cognitive science. I mean, that's not easy
at all because I would imagine that if someone
was to get into a phd, that is so
interdisciplinary and they come from, for example, anthropology or
economics or psychology, I mean, they have been trained
and they are familiarized with the particular math methodologies,
uh ways of theorizing from there are those specific
areas, right? And so uh when they go into
the phd, they also have to try to train
themselves uh when it comes to all of those
different um ways of theorizing and methodologies from uh
fields that they are not familiar with that. And
I, I mean, I'm not, uh I'm not saying
that these also cannot really be a collaborative enterprise
because uh you also might collaborate with other people
in your phd and get insights from them. But,
but still, I mean, you, you've already went through
several, several years acquiring knowledge and training yourself in
how to be a, I don't know, as, and
a scientist in psychology, anthropology, economics or whatever. And
now suddenly you also, you have to expand and
what, what you've learned from one area does not
necessarily apply or work the same for other areas.
Right. Yeah. Um Yeah, that, that is exactly right.
So in um um economics, the sample sizes tend
to be much, much bigger than in, in psychology,
And in the, in the first couple of months,
I was uh surprised at this frankly that, um
uh but then I understood that the, that the
goal of data collection in, in one field and
in, and in the other is, is not the
same. Um And then same, same goes for the,
for the statistical methods themselves. Um There are certain
models that uh that are uh favored in, in,
in, in, in psychology. Uh BUT they are not
used at all in, in uh uh economics. And
if you ask um uh professors, then they, they,
they might say that that, yeah, don't, don't use
that because um um it, it introduces uh too,
too much noise in your, to your, to your
results and, and it's very hard to interpret them.
But in, in psychology, it's um it seems to
be fine and, and also we uh we have
to understand that these, these fields are also a
collection of um conventions. So uh how you, how,
how, how you write a ho how you write
a, a AAA paper, how you formulate a question,
how you uh choose your specific uh method? They
to uh to some extent they are, they are
based on the, the, the conventions in that, in
that specific field. Um And then, yeah, you, you,
you said uh collaboration with other fields. So um
one very rewarding thing of being part of the
AC lab is that um uh every member comes
from, uh, from a, from a different field. Uh,
MANY are trained in, uh, anthropology. Some, some people
are trained in, uh, uh, political science. Um, AND
of course, uh, everybody has, uh, some training in,
in psy psychology. So, um, that not only means
that collectively we have quite a big, uh, wealth
of, um, ideas and, uh, and, uh, and knowledge,
it also means that, uh, we can really learn,
learn from each other and, and um and we
can um he help each other to come up
with a, with a richer uh ex ex explanation
of the, of the uh PP phenomena that we
are uh uh uh studying and to come back
to the very beginning of the interview, we are,
we are all um interested in um coming up
with explanations that, that really get them to the
core of the, of these weird things that we
see uh happening in, in society every day.
Mhm Y Yeah. And I would imagine also here
that uh I mean, the there's this common idea
there that there's one way of doing science and
you learn how to do it, you learn, for
example, how to read the paper, you learn statistical
analysis and all of that and uh you're fine,
you can properly evaluate scientific information from all areas.
But uh I mean, uh sometimes I've talked with
people who do work in education, educational psychologists, for
example, people from cognitive science that also do work
on that. And I think that the correct term
mirror would be uh context independent critical thinking skills.
That is uh suppo supposed set of critical thinking
skills in science that you could apply across all
disciplines and domains. But uh I, I guess that
the uh it doesn't really work that way because
to pro to be able to properly evaluate work
in anthropology, psychology, economics and so on, you really
have to do the work and learn the, the,
the theories there and learn how to properly evaluate
evidence there, learn the methodology, particularly the methodologies vary
a lot across different disciplines and learn how to
really, I mean, so I've read the paper, what
can I conclude from these, from these data? Uh
I mean, i it's, it's not the same across
different domains, right? I mean, of course, you are
more aware of this than I am, I guess.
So, do, do you agree with that or, or
not?
Yeah. Uh I do so. Um HISTORICALLY, uh and
an anthropology and psychology has been um uh pitted
against because um um you know, to, to be
very um to put, put things in a nutshell.
Uh An, an anthropology tries to explain things uh
from the, from the perspective of how the that
specific context uh shapes the, the, the, the behavior
of the, of, of the person or, or, or
the group. And uh psychology is the opposite in,
in the sense that it, it, it, it assumes
that there are that there are universal things about
uh every human being. And um when you, when
you read a paper in, in one field and,
and then the other, then, then, then you have
to keep this um um this um main as
assumption in mind or uh or another example is
um economics and, and, and, and psychology, so many
models in micro uh economics um assume rational choice.
And then um many findings in, in psychology have
shown that uh people are not always rational. Uh
So those uh these deviations from the, from the
rational choice uh have been called uh uh cognitive
biases. But actually, I, I wouldn't recall them uh
that because they are not, they are, they're not
a mistake. They are, these uh biases would be
better called as uh mental shortcuts that evolved to
make uh uh decision making easier. But when they
are taken to a, to a slightly different uh
con context, then uh they, they might lead to
a worse outcome. So, having a strong uh uh
preference for calorie rich uh food or sweet, sweet,
sweet foods is not um uh a fundamental mistake
that we have to correct that this evolved in
a, in an environment where uh where food was,
was scarce and you couldn't go to the supermarket
and we,
we were, we were more calorie restricted.
Right? Yes, exactly. So, um you said something about
one way to do science. Right. And I, I
think the one that, um, the, the one good
way or to, to do science, right is to
stay open minded and, uh, uh, curious and, um,
um, well, try to read across fields and also
to, to have, uh, hobbies outside academia because, uh,
as phd students it's easy to, to, to think
that we have to spend 12 hours a day
on our, on our thesis. But um I don't
think that that's um that's the right thing to,
to do.
Uh A and by the way, and this will
probably be my last question since uh I introduced
the topic by mentioning mental health in phd students.
So I, in your experience, what would you say
are some of the mental health consequences of really
having to make this shift into becoming a phd
student?
Well, a common thing is the impostors, impostors syndrome
where you, where you think that you, you don't
actually belong or you, you are a fraud, you
are not cut out to, to do the work
that you are supposed to be doing, right? But
um I guess in 99% of the cases that's,
that's not true. Um Some, some something else that
that's common is that in my experience that some
phd students feel uh isolated. Um But when you
know that um most people around you struggle with
the same things, then that knowledge should make you
feel less isolated So this is also an example
of how common knowledge changes our behavior.
And I would imagine that, of course, I haven't
looked at the data for a while now, but
I remember reading some studies a few years ago
where if I remember correctly, um phd students suffer,
tend to suffer from anxiety, depression and other conditions
like that. I, I mean, they, when I say
they tend to suffer, it's uh higher proportion than
the general population. I, I guess,
yeah, I, I think I've seen that too but
I'm not sure what explains that. So it, it,
I, I don't think that um people who are
not prone to uh an anxiety and depression suddenly
and develop them when they start their phd s,
it's maybe it might be the case that people
who are already prone to these, uh to these
conditions sort of self select themselves into, into the,
into the phd. Um But in a, in a
sense it, it doesn't really matter what, um what,
what the, what the source of, of this is
because um uh what, what is the point is,
what, what can be done to, to make it
easier. Um And so many, many universities or have
a, have a uh some sort of in House
uh Psychological Council. Um And in, in general there,
there's a lot of focus on, on mental health
and all sorts of social media platforms. And um
if supervisors are, are aware of this, that um,
that their students are also human beings and they
are, it's, it's not just that the, that, that
the two of them were gonna, we gonna work
on a topic together but uh that both of
them or the, the students have, have these uh
sorts of um challenges then most supervisors in, in
my experience try to um accommodate for this and,
and make it uh a smoother ride.
Mhm. Yeah. And, and also I would imagine that
another thing that it has been implicit and in
what we were saying here is that when you
move from, for example, a master's degree to a
phd, the workload also goes uh I, I mean,
increases a lot,
right? Well, in, in my case, it's not, it's
not, not exactly the true. So when I was
a master student, I uh I felt that I
had much more work to do on a day,
day, day by day basis. But that, that's because
my task at the time was to master all
these, all these different uh concepts and fields, etcetera
and as, as a phd student, you are your
own boss. Uh So it's really up to you
how much you, you work on a on a
on a given day. I think there are two
key key things in, in uh managing the the
workload. One is to be to be consistent and
do a bit every day. And of course, what
is the bit that, that you do every day
is up, up to you. So you have to
spend some time on, um, on, on discovering what
works for you. Um The other thing is that
you have to be clear about uh your goals
so so that you can be intentional about how
you spend those 5688 hours per, per day on,
on your work. Because um it's a policy to
think that you have to read everything that's been
ever written before before you can actively uh actively,
actively contribute. And I, I fall into this trap
sometimes too and it's uh an idle reading. It's
pleasant, but it's, it's not always the most useful
thing, thing to do, right? Um So I would
say that um the phd journey is a lot
is, is uh similar to art because it's a
creative uh uh process where nobody tells you what
the end goal is supposed to be like. But
it's, it comes from you and from your, from
your ideas and from your own uh influences. And
um you will know when it's the most um
the most ready to be for the, for the
uh public eye.
Mhm Great. Sore. Uh Let's send the interview here.
Would you like to tell people just before we
go where they can find you and your work
on the internet?
Uh Sure. So, um I recently became active on
Blue Sky, which is the new uh social media
app uh for academics and for other people too.
And because Twitter is not what it used to
be. Um So you can, you can find me
on blue sky and also on the uh a
web website which is Ac dot C eu.edu.
Mhm. Great. So I'm leaving uh links to that
in the description box of the interview. And thank
you so much for taking the time to come
on the show. It's been fun to talk to
you.
Well, thank you so much. It's been my pleasure.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Zuk Mar Nevs calling in Hafid Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz J
and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes Mark
Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends, David Wilson, Yasa,
dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani, Charlotte, Bli,
Nicole Barba, Adam hunt, Pavlo Stassi, Nale Me. Gary
G Alman, Samos, Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price
Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca Lati Gilon
Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams
and Peter Wo David Williams Di Costa Anton Erickson
Charles Murray, Alex Chao, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore
Fist Larry Dey Junior, Old Einon Starry Michael Bailey
then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake
Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor. Luke Neeson,
Chris to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda
Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine
Steinman, Perros, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan
Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi. Perpendicular Janner Urla. Good enough
Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers
is our web, Jim Frank Luca Toni, Tom Veg
and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz
and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you
for all